README.md, before:

# V-LARA Airspace Data

This repository contains airspace data for the V-LARA system.

- [Pilot Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/finnish-airports-charts/page/v-lara-airspace-reservation) 
- [ATC Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/special-procedures/page/v-lara-atc-guide) 

If you'd like to add your country's FIR or a new airspace dataset, follow the steps below.

---

## 📁 Create the two files for your FIR

You will need to create **two files** named after your FIR (replace `xxxx` with the FIR name in **lowercase**):

1. `xxxx.geojson` – for airspace geometry
2. `xxxx.json` – for FIR configuration

---

## 🌍 Add `.geojson` File (`xxxx.geojson`)

This file should follow the GeoJSON format and define each airspace volume as a `Feature`.

**Example: `myfir.geojson`**

```json
{
  "type": "FeatureCollection",
  "features": [
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "properties": {
        "name": "TSA1",
        "type": "TSA",
        "upperFL": 660,
        "lowerFL": 95
      },
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Polygon",
        "coordinates": [
          [
            [27.1153, 57.7875],
            [26.5861, 57.6333],
            [26.1611, 57.9083],
            [25.2217, 58.2014],
            [25.2222, 58.2736],
            [25.7456, 58.3797],
            [26.75, 58.3667],
            [27.1675, 57.9175],
            [27.1153, 57.7875]
          ]
        ]
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "properties": {
        "name": "TSA2",
        "type": "TSA",
        "upperFL": 245,
        "lowerFL": 95,
        "mustBeBookedWith": ["TSA1"],
        "activationLimits": [
          {"time": ["0900", "2000"], "month": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], "weekday": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]},
          {"time": ["2000", "2200"], "month": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], "weekday": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]}
        ]
      },
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Polygon",
        "coordinates": [
          [
            [23.2075, 59.1261],
            [24.2236, 59.3049],
            [24.2611, 59.2283],
            [23.4333, 58.9],
            [23.2075, 59.1261]
          ]
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### ✅ Required GeoJSON Properties

Each `Feature` must contain the following fields inside its `properties` object:

| Field                 | Type   | Description                                  |
|-----------------------|--------|----------------------------------------------|
| `name`                | string | airspace name (e.g., `"TSA1"`). The airspace must match with the name in TopSky areas.txt!  |
| `type`                | string | Type of airspace (e.g., `"TSA"`, `"Local TRA"`). Keep the type as short as possible.        |
| `lowerFL`             | number | Lower flight level (e.g., SFC → `0`. 500FT → `5`. 9500FT → `95`)                         |
| `upperFL`             | number | Upper flight level (e.g., 10700 FT → `107`. UNL → `999`)                                  |
| (`mustBeBookedWith`)  | array  | Optional list of airspace names that must be booked together or prior (e.g., `["TSA1", "TSA2"]`) |
| (`activationLimits`)  | array  | Optional list of time + month + weekday limitations (see example json above) |


Make sure that:
- Each airspace has a **distinct `name`** and it shall **match with TopSky areas.txt**.
- Note! If you leave the name empty `"name": ""`, the shape will be visible on the map but not as a reservable airspace. This might be useful in order to display country borders etc.
- Coordinates are listed in the `[longitude, latitude]` format.
- The polygon is **closed** — the first and last coordinate pairs should match.

---

## 📦 Add .json File (`xxxx.json`)

This file defines how the FIR is displayed in the app and how airspaces are grouped.

### ✅ Example Structure

```json
{
  "mapCenter": [24.3, 58.5510],
  "mapZoom": 5.4,
  "pilotDocs": "https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/finnish-airports-charts/page/v-lara-airspace-reservation",
  "groups": {
    "GROUP1": {
      "airspaces": ["TSA1", "TSA2"],
      "lowerFL": 30,
      "upperFL": 999
    }
  }
}
```

### 🔍 JSON Field Descriptions

| Field        | Type               | Description                                                            |
|--------------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `mapCenter`  | `[number, number]` | Map center `[longitude, latitude]` for the default view                |
| `mapZoom`    | `number`           | Initial zoom level (e.g., `5.4`)                                       |
| (`pilotDocs`)  | `string`         | Optional URL to local procedures for Area Reservations                 |
| `groups`     | `object`           | A collection of airspace groups for organizing layers and filtering    |

Each entry in the `groups` object defines a preset selection of many airspace blocks. This makes it faster for the user to select commonly grouped airspace selections.

### 🧱 Group Object Structure

Each group must include:

| Field        | Type       | Description                                                  |
|--------------|------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| `airspaces`  | `string[]` | A list of airspace `name`s that belong to this group         |
| `lowerFL`    | `number`   | Preset Lower FL (e.g., `30`)         |
| `upperFL`    | `number`   | Preset Upper FL (e.g., `999`)        |

Make sure that the `airspaces` name's matches with the names defined in the .geojson file.

**Example with multiple groups:**

```json
{
  "mapCenter": [24.3, 58.5510],
  "mapZoom": 6,
  "groups": {
    "TRIDENT": {
      "airspaces": ["TSA1", "TSA2"],
      "lowerFL": 0,
      "upperFL": 245
    },
    "POKKA": {
      "airspaces": ["TSA3", "TSA4", "TRA87W"],
      "lowerFL": 95,
      "upperFL": 999
    }
  }
}
```

If your FIR does not have grouped airspace reservations:

```json
{
  "mapCenter": [24.3, 58.5510],
  "mapZoom": 6,
  "groups": {
    "No Presets": {
      "airspaces": [""],
      "lowerFL": 0,
      "upperFL": 999
    }
  }
}
```

### ✅ Validation Tips

Before submitting a Pull Request, ensure:

- [ ] Each airspace `Feature` in your `.geojson` has a unique and descriptive `name` and the name matches with an airspace defined in TopSky areas.txt.
- [ ] All `name`s in your `.json` file’s `groups.airspaces` array **match exactly** with the `name` values in your `.geojson`
- [ ] Your `.geojson` file is valid [GeoJSON](https://geojson.org/) (you can use [geojson.io](https://geojson.io) or [geojsonlint.com](https://geojsonlint.com) to validate)
- [ ] Polygons in the `.geojson` are properly **closed** (i.e. the first and last coordinate pair are the same)
- [ ] Your `.json` file is valid JSON (no trailing commas, properly quoted strings, etc.)
- [ ] Flight levels (`lowerFL` and `upperFL`) are correct
- [ ] `mapCenter` and `mapZoom` are appropriate to display the full FIR area. You may login to V-LARA profile `EACCZAMC (test environment)` to view boundaries of different FIR's. The coordinates are shown in the top-right corner of the Map Display.

---

## 🔗 Connect with EuroScope TopSky plugin

After submitting and Approved Pull Request:
- Navigate to [lara-backend.lusep.fi/topsky/xxxx.txt](https://lara-backend.lusep.fi/topsky/lara.txt) (replace xxxx with your FIR code)
- The file shows all **currently ongoing** reservations. By default it includes a dummy reservation `VLARA:350101:350101:0:1000:1001:0:100:VLARA:`. This makes sure that TopSky is able to read the file at all times even when no reservations are present.
- Navigate to plugins/ `TopSkySettings.txt` and add the following details:
  - `HTTP_Areas_Remote_URL=https://lara-backend.lusep.fi/topsky/xxxx.txt`
  - `Areas_PreActiveTime=900` use at least 900s (15min) 
    
---

## ❓ Questions and manuals

You may contact me on Discord for any questions.

- [Pilot Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/finnish-airports-charts/page/v-lara-airspace-reservation) 
- [ATC Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/special-procedures/page/v-lara-atc-guide)

Commit message:

Add: 'ASM shall be set to open automatically on startup'
For best results and to enable automatic area loading, the Airspace Management Window shall be set to open automatically on startup.

README.md, after:

# V-LARA Airspace Data

This repository contains airspace data for the V-LARA system.

- [Pilot Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/finnish-airports-charts/page/v-lara-airspace-reservation) 
- [ATC Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/special-procedures/page/v-lara-atc-guide) 

If you'd like to add your country's FIR or a new airspace dataset, follow the steps below.

---

## 📁 Create the two files for your FIR

You will need to create **two files** named after your FIR (replace `xxxx` with the FIR name in **lowercase**):

1. `xxxx.geojson` – for airspace geometry
2. `xxxx.json` – for FIR configuration

---

## 🌍 Add `.geojson` File (`xxxx.geojson`)

This file should follow the GeoJSON format and define each airspace volume as a `Feature`.

**Example: `myfir.geojson`**

```json
{
  "type": "FeatureCollection",
  "features": [
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "properties": {
        "name": "TSA1",
        "type": "TSA",
        "upperFL": 660,
        "lowerFL": 95
      },
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Polygon",
        "coordinates": [
          [
            [27.1153, 57.7875],
            [26.5861, 57.6333],
            [26.1611, 57.9083],
            [25.2217, 58.2014],
            [25.2222, 58.2736],
            [25.7456, 58.3797],
            [26.75, 58.3667],
            [27.1675, 57.9175],
            [27.1153, 57.7875]
          ]
        ]
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "properties": {
        "name": "TSA2",
        "type": "TSA",
        "upperFL": 245,
        "lowerFL": 95,
        "mustBeBookedWith": ["TSA1"],
        "activationLimits": [
          {"time": ["0900", "2000"], "month": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], "weekday": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]},
          {"time": ["2000", "2200"], "month": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], "weekday": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]}
        ]
      },
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Polygon",
        "coordinates": [
          [
            [23.2075, 59.1261],
            [24.2236, 59.3049],
            [24.2611, 59.2283],
            [23.4333, 58.9],
            [23.2075, 59.1261]
          ]
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### ✅ Required GeoJSON Properties

Each `Feature` must contain the following fields inside its `properties` object:

| Field                 | Type   | Description                                  |
|-----------------------|--------|----------------------------------------------|
| `name`                | string | airspace name (e.g., `"TSA1"`). The airspace must match with the name in TopSky areas.txt!  |
| `type`                | string | Type of airspace (e.g., `"TSA"`, `"Local TRA"`). Keep the type as short as possible.        |
| `lowerFL`             | number | Lower flight level (e.g., SFC → `0`. 500FT → `5`. 9500FT → `95`)                         |
| `upperFL`             | number | Upper flight level (e.g., 10700 FT → `107`. UNL → `999`)                                  |
| (`mustBeBookedWith`)  | array  | Optional list of airspace names that must be booked together or prior (e.g., `["TSA1", "TSA2"]`) |
| (`activationLimits`)  | array  | Optional list of time + month + weekday limitations (see example json above) |


Make sure that:
- Each airspace has a **distinct `name`** and it shall **match with TopSky areas.txt**.
- Note! If you leave the name empty `"name": ""`, the shape will be visible on the map but not as a reservable airspace. This might be useful in order to display country borders etc.
- Coordinates are listed in the `[longitude, latitude]` format.
- The polygon is **closed** — the first and last coordinate pairs should match.

---

## 📦 Add .json File (`xxxx.json`)

This file defines how the FIR is displayed in the app and how airspaces are grouped.

### ✅ Example Structure

```json
{
  "mapCenter": [24.3, 58.5510],
  "mapZoom": 5.4,
  "pilotDocs": "https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/finnish-airports-charts/page/v-lara-airspace-reservation",
  "groups": {
    "GROUP1": {
      "airspaces": ["TSA1", "TSA2"],
      "lowerFL": 30,
      "upperFL": 999
    }
  }
}
```

### 🔍 JSON Field Descriptions

| Field        | Type               | Description                                                            |
|--------------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `mapCenter`  | `[number, number]` | Map center `[longitude, latitude]` for the default view                |
| `mapZoom`    | `number`           | Initial zoom level (e.g., `5.4`)                                       |
| (`pilotDocs`)  | `string`         | Optional URL to local procedures for Area Reservations                 |
| `groups`     | `object`           | A collection of airspace groups for organizing layers and filtering    |

Each entry in the `groups` object defines a preset selection of many airspace blocks. This makes it faster for the user to select commonly grouped airspace selections.

### 🧱 Group Object Structure

Each group must include:

| Field        | Type       | Description                                                  |
|--------------|------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| `airspaces`  | `string[]` | A list of airspace `name`s that belong to this group         |
| `lowerFL`    | `number`   | Preset Lower FL (e.g., `30`)         |
| `upperFL`    | `number`   | Preset Upper FL (e.g., `999`)        |

Make sure that the `airspaces` name's matches with the names defined in the .geojson file.

**Example with multiple groups:**

```json
{
  "mapCenter": [24.3, 58.5510],
  "mapZoom": 6,
  "groups": {
    "TRIDENT": {
      "airspaces": ["TSA1", "TSA2"],
      "lowerFL": 0,
      "upperFL": 245
    },
    "POKKA": {
      "airspaces": ["TSA3", "TSA4", "TRA87W"],
      "lowerFL": 95,
      "upperFL": 999
    }
  }
}
```

If your FIR does not have grouped airspace reservations:

```json
{
  "mapCenter": [24.3, 58.5510],
  "mapZoom": 6,
  "groups": {
    "No Presets": {
      "airspaces": [""],
      "lowerFL": 0,
      "upperFL": 999
    }
  }
}
```

### ✅ Validation Tips

Before submitting a Pull Request, ensure:

- [ ] Each airspace `Feature` in your `.geojson` has a unique and descriptive `name` and the name matches with an airspace defined in TopSky areas.txt.
- [ ] All `name`s in your `.json` file’s `groups.airspaces` array **match exactly** with the `name` values in your `.geojson`
- [ ] Your `.geojson` file is valid [GeoJSON](https://geojson.org/) (you can use [geojson.io](https://geojson.io) or [geojsonlint.com](https://geojsonlint.com) to validate)
- [ ] Polygons in the `.geojson` are properly **closed** (i.e. the first and last coordinate pair are the same)
- [ ] Your `.json` file is valid JSON (no trailing commas, properly quoted strings, etc.)
- [ ] Flight levels (`lowerFL` and `upperFL`) are correct
- [ ] `mapCenter` and `mapZoom` are appropriate to display the full FIR area. You may login to V-LARA profile `EACCZAMC (test environment)` to view boundaries of different FIR's. The coordinates are shown in the top-right corner of the Map Display.

---

## 🔗 Connect with EuroScope TopSky plugin

After submitting and Approved Pull Request:
- Navigate to [lara-backend.lusep.fi/topsky/xxxx.txt](https://lara-backend.lusep.fi/topsky/lara.txt) (replace xxxx with your FIR code)
- The file shows all **currently ongoing** reservations. By default it includes a dummy reservation `VLARA:350101:350101:0:1000:1001:0:100:VLARA:`. This makes sure that TopSky is able to read the file at all times even when no reservations are present.
- Navigate to plugins/ `TopSkySettings.txt` and add the following details:
  - `HTTP_Areas_Remote_URL=https://lara-backend.lusep.fi/topsky/xxxx.txt`
  - `Areas_PreActiveTime=900` use at least 900s (15min)
- For automatic area loading, the `Airspace Management Window` shall be set to open automatically on startup
    
---

## ❓ Questions and manuals

You may contact me on Discord for any questions.

- [Pilot Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/finnish-airports-charts/page/v-lara-airspace-reservation) 
- [ATC Manual](https://wiki.vatsim-scandinavia.org/books/special-procedures/page/v-lara-atc-guide)
